nay,  but he prated, and spoke such scurvy and provoking termsagainst your honor, that,  with the little godliness i have, i did full hard forbear him.  but,  i pray you,  sir, are you fast married?  be assured of this, that the magnifico is much beloved.  and hath,  in his effect,  a voice potentialas double as the duke's: he will divorce you.  or put upon you what restraint and grievancethe law,  with all his might to enforce it on,  will give him cable. 
those are the raised father and his friends:you were best go in. 
by janus,  i think no. 
the duke does greet you,  general.  and he requires your haste-post-haste appearanceeven on the instant. 
something from cyprus,  as i may divine:it is a business of some heat: the galleyshave sent a dozen sequent messengersthis very night at one another's heels.  and many of the consuls,  raised and met, are at the duke's already: you have been hotly called for.  when,  being not at your lodging to be found, the senate hath sent about three several queststo search you out. 
ancient,  what makes he here? 
here comes another troop to seek for you. 
signior,  it is the moor. 
o thou foul thief,  where hast thou stowed my daughter? damned as thou art,  thou hast enchanted her.  for i'll refer me to all things of sense, if she in chains of magic were not bound, whether a maid so tender,  fair,  and happy, so opposite to marriage that she shunnedthe wealthy curled darlings of our nation, would ever have,  to incur a general mock, run from her guardage to the sooty bosomof such a thing as thou,  to fear,  not to delight. judge me the world,  if 'tis not gross in sensethat thou hast practised on her with foul charms.  abused her delicate youth with drugs or mineralsthat weaken motion: i'll have't disputed on.  'tis probable,  and palpable to thinking. i therefore apprehend and do attach theefor an abuser of the world,  a practiserof arts inhibited and out of warrant.  lay hold upon him: if he do resist, subdue him at his peril. 
to prison.   till fit timeof law and course of direct sessioncall thee to answer. 
'tis true,  most worthy signior.  the duke's in council,  and your noble self, i am sure,  is sent for. 
a maiden never bold:of spirit so still and quiet that her motionblushed at herself.   and she,  in spite of nature, of years,  of country,  credit,  everything,  to fall in love with what she feared to look on!it is judgement maimed and most imperfectthat will confess perfection so could erragainst all rules of nature.   and must be drivento find out practices of cunning hell, why this should be.  i therefore vouch again, that with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood, or with some dram conjured to this effect, he wrought upon her. 
fetch desdemona hither. 
say it,  othello. 
i think this tale would win my daughter too.  good brabantio, take up this mangled matter at the best. men do their broken weapons rather usethan their bare hands. 
if you please, be't at her father's. 
nor i.  i would not there reside, to put my father in impatient thoughts, by being in his eye.  most gracious duke, to my unfolding lend your prosperous ear.  and let me find a charter in your voiceto assist my simpleness. 
be it as you shall privately determine, either for her stay or going: the affair cries haste, and speed must answer it.  
at nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.  othello,  leave some officer behind, and he shall our commission bring to you.  with such things else of quality and respectas doth import you. 
let it be so.  good night to everyone.  [to brabantio. ] and,  noble signior, if virtue no delighted beauty lack, your son-in-law is far more fair than black. 
iago,  
my dear othello!
the heavens forbidbut that our loves and comforts should increaseeven as our days do grow!
[aside. ] o,  you are well tuned now!but i'll set down the pegs that make this music, as honest as i am. 
do thou meet me presently at the harbour.  come hither.  if thoube'st valiant,  as,  they say,  base men being in love have then anobility in their natures more than is native to them,  list me. the lieutenant to-night watches on the court of guard: first,  imust tell thee this desdemona is directly in love with him. 
iago hath direction what to do.  but,  notwithstanding,  with my personal eyewill i look to't. 
welcome,  iago.   we must to the watch. 
zounds,  i bleed still.   i am hurt to the death. 
hold,  ho! lieutenant,  sir,  montano,  gentlemen,  have you forgot all sense of place and duty? hold! the general speaks to you.   hold,  hold,  for shame!
i do not know: friends all but now,  even now, in quarter,  and in terms like bride and groomdevesting them for bed.   and then,  but now as if some planet had unwitted men,  swords out,  and tilting one at other's breastin opposition bloody.  i cannot speakany beginning to this peevish odds.  and would in action glorious i had lostthose legs that brought me to a part of it!
worthy montano,  you were wont be civil.  the gravity and stillness of your youththe world hath noted,  and your name is greatin mouths of wisest censure: what's the matter, that you unlace your reputation thus, and spend your rich opinion for the nameof a night-brawler?  give me answer to it. 
worthy othello,  i am hurt to danger:your officer,  iago,  can inform you,  while i spare speech,  which something now offends me,  of all that i do know: nor know i aughtby me that's said or done amiss this night:unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, and to defend ourselves it be a sinwhen violence assails us. 
if partially affined,  or leagued in office, thou dost deliver more or less than truth, thou art no soldier. 
what's the matter? 
what,  are you hurt,  lieutenant? 
well,  my good lord,  i'll do't. 
be thou assured,  good cassio,  i will doall my abilities in thy behalf. 
nothing,  my lord: or if i know not what. 
cassio,  my lord! no,  sure,  i cannot think it, that he would steal away so guilty-like, seeing you coming. 
how now,  my lord!i have been talking with a suitor here, a man that languishes in your displeasure. 
why,  your lieutenant,  cassio.  good my lord, if i have any grace or power to move you, his present reconciliation take.  for if he be not one that truly loves you, that errs in ignorance and not in cunning, i have no judgement in an honest face:i pr'ythee,  call him back. 
ay,  sooth.   so humbledthat he hath left part of his grief with meto suffer with him.  good love,  call him back. 
but shall't be shortly? 
shall't be to-night at supper? 
to-morrow dinner then? 
why then to-morrow night.   or tuesday morn.  on tuesday noon,  or night.   on wednesday morn: i pr'ythee,  name the time.   but let it notexceed three days: in faith,  he's penitent.  and yet his trespass,  in our common reason,  save that,  they say,  the wars must make examplesout of their best,  is not almost a faultto incur a private check.  when shall he come? tell me,  othello: i wonder in my soul, what you would ask me,  that i should deny, or stand so mammering on.  what! michael cassio, that came awooing with you.   and so many a time, when i have spoke of you dispraisingly, hath ta'en your part.   to have so much to doto bring him in! trust me,  i could do much,  
why,  this is not a boon.  'tis as i should entreat you wear your gloves, or feed on nourishing dishes,  or keep you warm, or sue to you to do a peculiar profitto your own person: nay,  when i have a suitwherein i mean to touch your love indeed, it shall be full of poise and difficult weight, and fearful to be granted. 
shall i deny you?  no: farewell,  my lord. 
emilia,  come.  be as your fancies teach you.  whate'er you be,  i am obedient. 
my noble lord,  
did michael cassio,  when you wooed my lady, know of your love? 
but for a satisfaction of my thought.  no further harm. 
i did not think he had been acquainted with her. 
indeed!
honest,  my lord!
my lord,  for aught i know. 
think,  my lord!
my lord,  you know i love you. 
for michael cassio, i dare be sworn i think that he is honest. 
men should be what they seem.  or those that be not,  would they might seem none!
why,  then,  i think cassio's an honest man. 
good my lord,  pardon me:though i am bound to every act of duty, i am not bound to that all slaves are free to. utter my thoughts?  why,  say they are vile and false.   as where's that palace whereinto foul thingssometimes intrude not?  who has a breast so purebut some uncleanly apprehensionskeep leets and law-days,  and in session sitwith meditations lawful? 
i do beseech you,  though i perchance am vicious in my guess, as,  i confess,  it is my nature's plagueto spy into abuses,  and of my jealousyshape faults that are not,  that your wisdom yet, from one that so imperfectly conceits, would take no notice.   nor build yourself a troubleout of his scattering and unsure observance: it were not for your quiet nor your good, nor for my manhood,  honesty,  or wisdom, to let you know my thoughts. 
good name in man and woman,  dear my lord, is the immediate jewel of their souls:who steals my purse steals trash.   'tis something,  nothing.  'twas mine,  'tis his,  and has been slave to thousands.  but he that filches from me my good namerobs me of that which not enriches himand makes me poor indeed. 
you cannot,  if my heart were in your hand.  nor shall not,  whilst 'tis in my custody. 
o,  beware,  my lord,  of jealousy.  it is the green-eyed monster which doth mockthe meat it feeds on: that cuckold lives in blisswho,  certain of his fate,  loves not his wronger.  but o,  what damned minutes tells he o'erwho dotes,  yet doubts,  suspects,  yet strongly loves!
poor and content is rich,  and rich enough.  but riches fineless is as poor as winterto him that ever fears he shall be poor.   good heaven,  the souls of all my tribe defendfrom jealousy!
i am glad of it.   for now i shall have reasonto show the love and duty that i bear youwith franker spirit: therefore,  as i am bound, receive it from me: i speak not yet of proof. look to your wife.   observe her well with cassio.  wear your eye thus,  not jealous nor secure:i would not have your free and noble nature, out of self-bounty,  be abused.   look to't. i know our country disposition well.  in venice they do let heaven see the pranksthey dare not show their husbands.   their best conscienceis not to leave undone,  but keep unknown. 
she did deceive her father,  marrying you.  and when she seemed to shake and fear your looks, she loved them most. 
why,  go to then.  she that,  so young,  could give out such a seeming, to seal her father's eyes up close as oak,  he thought 'twas witchcraft,  but i am much to blame.  i humbly do beseech you of your pardonfor too much loving you. 
i see this hath a little dashed your spirits. 
trust me,  i fear it has. i hope you will consider what is spokecomes from my love.   but i do see you're moved: i am to pray you not to strain my speechto grosser issues nor to larger reachthan to suspicion. 
should you do so,  my lord, my speech should fall into such vile successwhich my thoughts aimed not.  cassio's my worthy friend: my lord,  i see you're moved. 
long live she so! and long live you to think so!
ay,  there's the point: as,  to be bold with you,  not to affect many proposed matches, of her own clime,  complexion,  and degree, whereto we see in all things nature tends,  foh! one may smell in such a will most rank, foul disproportion,  thoughts unnatural: but pardon me: i do not in positiondistinctly speak of her.   though i may fear, her will,  recoiling to her better judgement, may fall to match you with her country forms, and happily repent. 
[going. ] my lord,  i take my leave. 
[returning. ] my lord,  i would i might entreat your honourto scan this thing no further.   leave it to time:though it be fit that cassio have his place,  for sure he fills it up with great ability,  yet,  if you please to hold him off awhile, you shall by that perceive him and his means:note if your lady strain his entertainmentwith any strong or vehement importunity.  much will be seen in that.  in the meantime, let me be thought too busy in my fears,  as worthy cause i have to fear i am,  and hold her free,  i do beseech your honour. 
i once more take my leave. 
how now,  my dear othello!your dinner,  and the generous islandersby you invited,  do attend your presence. 
why do you speak so faintly? are you not well? 
faith,  that's with watching.   'twill away again.  let me but bind it hard,  within this hourit will be well. 
i am very sorry that you are not well. 
why,  how now,  general! no more of that. 
how now,  my lord!
i am sorry to hear this. 
is't possible,  my lord?  
is't come to this? 
my noble lord,  
o grace! o heaven defend me!are you a man?  have you a soul or sense?  god be wi' you.   take mine office.  o wretched fool, that liv'st to make thine honesty a vice! o monstrous world! take note,  take note,  o world, to be direct and honest is not safe.  i thank you for this profit.   and from hencei'll love no friend,  sith love breeds such offense. 
i should be wise.   for honesty's a fool, and loses that it works for. 
i see,  sir,  you are eaten up with passion:i do repent me that i put it to you. you would be satisfied? 
and may: but how?  how satisfied,  my lord? would you,  the supervisor,  grossly gape on,  behold her tupped? 
it were a tedious difficulty,  i think, to bring them to that prospect: damn them then, if ever mortal eyes do see them bolstermore than their own! what then?  how then? what shall i say?  where's satisfaction? it is impossible you should see thiswere they as prime as goats,  as hot as monkeys, as salt as wolves in pride,  and fools as grossas ignorance made drunk.  but yet,  i say, if imputation and strong circumstances,  which lead directly to the door of truth,  will give you satisfaction,  you may have't. 
i do not like the office.  but,  sith i am entered in this cause so far,  pricked to it by foolish honesty and love,  i will go on.  i lay with cassio lately.  and,  being troubled with a raging tooth, i could not sleep. there are a kind of men so loose of soul, that in their sleeps will mutter their affairs:one of this kind is cassio:in sleep i heard him say,  "sweet desdemona, let us be wary,  let us hide our loves".  and then,  sir,  would he gripe and wring my hand, cry,  "o sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard, as if he plucked up kisses by the roots, that grew upon my lips: then laid his legover my thigh,  and sighed and kissed.   and thencried,  "cursed fate that gave thee to the moor!"
nay,  this was but his dream. 
and this may help to thicken other proofsthat do demonstrate thinly. 
nay,  but be wise: yet we see nothing done.  she may be honest yet.  tell me but this,  have you not sometimes seen a handkerchiefspotted with strawberries in your wife's hand? 
yet be content. 
patience,  i say.   your mind perhaps may change. 
do not rise yet.   [kneels. ]witness,  you ever-burning lights above, you elements that clip us round about,  witness that here iago doth give upthe execution of his wit,  hands,  heart, to wronged othello's service! let him command, and to obey shall be in me remorse, what bloody business ever.  
my friend is dead.   'tis done at your request:but let her live. 
i am your own forever. 
well,  my good lord. 
it yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow. 
you may,  indeed,  say so.  for 'twas that hand that gave away my heart. 
i cannot speak of this.  come now,  your promise. 
i have sent to bid cassio come speak with you. 
here,  my lord. 
i have it not about me. 
no,  faith,  my lord. 
is't possible? 
indeed! is't true? 
then would to god that i had never seen't!
why do you speak so startingly and rash? 
it is not lost.   but what an if it were? 
i say,  it is not lost. 
i pray,  talk me of cassio. 
a man that all his timehath founded his good fortunes on your love, shared dangers with you,  
in sooth,  you are to blame. 
is not this man jealous? 
what, to kiss in private? 
or to be naked with her friend in bedan hour or more,  not meaning any harm? 
so they do nothing,  'tis a venial slip:but if i give my wife a handkerchief,  
why,  then,  'tis hers,  my lord,  and being hers, she may,  i think,  bestow't on any man. 
her honour is an essence that's not seen.  they have it very oft that have it not:but,  for the handkerchief,  
ay,  what of that? 
what, if i had said i had seen him do you wrong? or heard him say,  as knaves be such abroad, who having,  by their own importunate suit, or voluntary dotage of some mistress, convinced or supplied them,  cannot choosebut they must blab,  
he hath,  my lord.   but be you well assured, no more than he'll unswear. 
faith,  that he did,  i know not what he did. 
lie,  
with her,  on her,  what you will. 
work on, my medicine,  work! thus credulous fools are caught.  and many worthy and chaste dames even thus, all guiltless,  meet reproach.  what,  ho! my lord!my lord,  i say! othello!how now,  cassio!
i mock you! no,  by heaven. would you would bear your fortune like a man!
there's many a beast,  then,  in a populous city, and many a civil monster. 
good sir,  be a man.  think every bearded fellow that's but yokedmay draw with you: there's millions now alivethat nightly lie in those unproper bedswhich they dare swear peculiar: your case is better. o,  'tis the spite of hell,  the fiend's arch-mock, to lip a wanton in a secure couch, and to suppose her chaste! no,  let me know.  and knowing what i am,  i know what she shall be. 
stand you awhile apart.  confine yourself but in a patient list. whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief,  a passion most unsuiting such a man,  cassio came hither: i shifted him away, and laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy.  bade him anon return,  and here speak with me.  the which he promised.  do but encave yourself, and mark the fleers,  the gibes,  and notable scorns, that dwell in every region of his face.  for i will make him tell the tale anew,  where,  how,  how oft,  how long ago,  and whenhe hath,  and is again to cope your wife:i say,  but mark his gesture.  marry,  patience.  or i shall say you are all in all in spleen, and nothing of a man. 
that's not amiss.  but yet keep time in all.  will you withdraw? now will i question cassio of bianca, a housewife that,  by selling her desires, buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creaturethat dotes on cassio,  as 'tis the strumpet's plagueto beguile many and be beguiled by one: he,  when he hears of her,  cannot refrainfrom the excess of laughter: here he comes: as he shall smile othello shall go mad.  and his unbookish jealousy must construepoor cassio's smiles,  gestures,  and light behaviorquite in the wrong. how do you now,  lieutenant? 
i never knew a woman love man so. 
do you hear,  cassio? 
she gives it out that you shall marry her:do you intend it? 
i marry her! what?  a customer! i pr'ythee,  bear some charityto my wit.   do not think it so unwholesome: ha,  ha,  ha!
faith,  the cry goes that you shall marry her. 
this is the monkey's own giving out: she is persuaded i willmarry her,  out of her own love and flattery,  not out of mypromise. 
she was here even now.   she haunts me in every place.  i was theother day talking on the sea bank with certain venetians,  andthither comes the bauble,  and falls thus about my neck,  
so hangs,  and lolls,  and weeps upon me.   so hales and pulls me:ha,  ha,  ha!
well,  i must leave her company. 
did you perceive how he laughed at his vice? 
and did you see the handkerchief? 
yours,  by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish womanyour wife! she gave it him,  and he hath given it his whore. 
nay,  you must forget that. 
nay,  that's not your way. 
she's the worse for all this. 
ay,  too gentle. 
if you are so fond over her iniquity,  give her patent tooffend.   for,  if it touch not you,  it comes near nobody. 
o,  'tis foul in her. 
that's fouler. 
do it not with poison.   strangle her in her bed,  even thebed she hath contaminated. 
and for cassio,  let me be his undertaker: you shall hearmore by midnight. 
something from venice,  sure.  'tis lodovicocome from the duke: and,  see,  your wife is with him. 
the duke and senators of venice greet you. 
and what's the news,  good cousin lodovico? 
my lord? 
he did not call.   he's busy in the paper. is there division 'twixt my lord and cassio? 
my lord? 
what,  is he angry? 
my lord? 
why,  sweet othello,  
i have not deserved this. 
i will not stay to offend you. 
my lord? 
who,  i,  my lord? 
is this the noble moor whom our full senatecall all-in-all sufficient?  is this the naturewhom passion could not shake?  whose solid virtuethe shot of accident nor dart of chancecould neither graze nor pierce? 
nor ever heard,  nor ever did suspect. 
but then i saw no harm,  and then i heardeach syllable that breath made up between them. 
never,  my lord. 
never. 
never,  my lord. 
i durst,  my lord,  to wager she is honest, lay down my soul at stake: if you think other, remove your thought,  it doth abuse your bosom. if any wretch have put this in your head, let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!for if she be not honest,  chaste,  and true, there's no man happy.   the purest of their wivesis foul as slander. 
my lord,  what is your will? 
what is your pleasure? 
what horrible fancy's this? 
upon my knees,  what doth your speech import? i understand a fury in your words, but not the words. 
your wife,  my lord.   your true and loyal wife. 
heaven doth truly know it. 
to whom,  my lord?  with whom?  how am i false? 
alas the heavy day! why do you weep? am i the motive of these tears,  my lord? if haply you my father do suspectan instrument of this your calling back, lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him, why,  i have lost him too. 
i hope my noble lord esteems me honest. 
alas,  what ignorant sin have i committed? 
by heaven,  you do me wrong. 
no,  as i am a christian:if to preserve this vessel for my lordfrom any other foul unlawful touchbe not to be a strumpet,  i am none. 
no,  as i shall be saved. 
o,  heaven forgive us!
alas,  what does this gentleman conceive?  how do you,  madam?  how do you,  my good lady? 
madam,  good night.   i humbly thank your ladyship. 
my lord? 
i will,  my lord. 
o,  villain that i am!
o,  help,  ho! light! a surgeon!
what,  ho! no watch?  no passage?  murder! murder!
who's there?  othello? 
will you come to bed,  my lord? 
ay,  my lord. 
alack,  my lord,  what may you mean by that? 
talk you of killing? 
then heaven have mercy on me!
if you say so,  i hope you will not kill me. 
and yet i fear you.   for you are fatal thenwhen your eyes roll so: why i should fear i know not, since guiltiness i know not.   but yet i feel i fear. 
they are loves i bear to you. 
that death's unnatural that kills for loving.  alas,  why gnaw you so your nether lip? some bloody passion shakes your very frame:these are portents.   but yet i hope,  i hope, they do not point on me. 
i will so.  what's the matter? 
no,  by my life and soul!send for the man,  and ask him. 
ay,  but not yet to die. 
then,  lord have mercy on me!
and have you mercy too! i never didoffend you in my life.   never loved cassiobut with such general warranty of heavenas i might love: i never gave him token. 
he found it then.  i never gave it him: send for him hither.  let him confess a truth. 
what,  my lord? 
how?  unlawfully? 
he will not say so. 
o,  my fear interprets! what,  is he dead? 
alas,  he is betrayed,  and i undone!
o,  banish me,  my lord,  but kill me not!
kill me to-morrow.   let me live to-night!
but half an hour!
but while i say one prayer!
my lord,  my lord! what,  ho! my lord,  my lord!
what,  ho! my lord,  my lord!
[within. ] o,  good my lord,  i would speak a word with you!
[within. ] i do beseech youthat i may speak with you,  o,  good my lord!
o,  my good lord,  yonder's foul murders done!
but now,  my lord. 
cassio,  my lord,  hath killed a young venetiancalled roderigo. 
no,  cassio is not killed. 
o,  falsely,  falsely murdered!
out,  and alas! that was my lady's voice.  help! help,  ho! help! o lady,  speak again!sweet desdemona! o sweet mistress,  speak!
alas,  who knows? 
she said so: i must needs report the truth. 
o,  the more angel she, and you the blacker devil!
thou dost belie her,  and thou art a devil. 
thou art rash as fire,  to saythat she was false: o,  she was heavenly true!
my husband!
that she was false to wedlock? 
my husband!
my husband!
o mistress,  villainy hath made mocks with love! my husband say that she was false!
if he say so,  may his pernicious soulrot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart:she was too fond of her most filthy bargain. 
do thy worst:this deed of thine is no more worthy heaventhan thou wast worthy her. 
thou hast not half that power to do me harmas i have to be hurt.  o gull! o dolt!as ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed,  i care not for thy sword.   i'll make thee known, though i lost twenty lives.  help! help,  ho! help!the moor hath killed my mistress! murder,  murder!
'tis a strange truth. 
nay,  lay thee down and roar.  for thou hast killed the sweetest innocentthat e'er did lift up eye. 
poor desdemona! i am glad thy father's dead:thy match was mortal to him,  and pure griefshore his old thread in twain: did he live now, this sight would make him do a desperate turn, yea,  curse his better angel from his side, and fall to reprobance. 
o heaven! o heavenly powers!
the woman falls.   sure,  he hath killed his wife. 
what did thy song bode,  lady? hark,  canst thou hear me?  i will play the swan, and die in music: [sings. ] "willow,  willow,  willow. moor,  she was chaste.   she loved thee,  cruel moor.  so come my soul to bliss,  as i speak true.  so speaking as i think,  i die,  i die. 
[within. ] if thou attempt it,  it will cost thee dear:thou hast no weapon,  and perforce must suffer. 
what is the matter? 
where is this rash and most unfortunate man? 
where is that viper?  bring the villain forth. 
wrench his sword from him. 
o thou othello,  that wert once so good, fall'n in the practice of a damned slave, what shall be said to thee? 
this wretch hath part confessed his villany:did you and he consent in cassio's death? 
dear general,  i never gave you cause. 
demand me nothing: what you know,  you know:from this time forth i never will speak word. 
sir,  you shall understand what hath befall'n, which,  as i think,  you know not.  here is a letterfound in the pocket of the slain roderigo, and here another: the one of them importsthe death of cassio to be undertookby roderigo. 
most heathenish and most gross!
i found it in my chamber.  and he himself confessed but even nowthat there he dropped it for a special purposewhich wrought to his desire. 
there is besides in roderigo's letter,  how he upbraids iago,  that he made himbrave me upon the watch.   whereon it camethat i was cast: and even but now he spake, after long seeming dead,  iago hurt him, iago set him on. 
o bloody period!
this did i fear,  but thought he had no weapon.  for he was great of heart.  
